================================================================================
                               SID-Article 0.1
  MOS Technology SID soundchip internals and applications on the Commodore 64
================================================================================


Who is SID?

 The soundchip that contributed heavily to the success of the Commodore 64
personal computer. It's unique among the soundchips with its outstanding sound
quality and capabilities for the microcomputer era. Designed in 1982 by
Bob Yannes's team, it sported synthesizer techniques yet unseen with other
computer brands: analog filter and mixing combined with highly flexible digital
control of 3-channel pitch, timbre, volume and cutoff curve. It shortly became
the beloved playground of great musicians making music for game industry, like
Rob Hubbard, Ben Daglish, Tim Follin, just to name a few of the first sailors.
 Thanks to its capabilities it still achieves juicy sounds today in good hands,
be it any music genre or trend, like Drum'n'Bass and Dubstep wave, for instance.
Every now and then new possibilities of SID are revealed by creative demoscene
enthusiasts who create new pieces of music for games, demos or just for fun.

What is this document about?

 I mostly cover the internals of how the SID works behind the scene, but that
doesn't mean this document is for geeks only. I'll try to make it an explanatory
easy read, gradually increasing the complexity. Even when a harder to undersand
part comes I'll try to explain it in the simplest way, accompanied by pictures.
 SID musicians who want to get a deeper understandig of the Hard Restart and
other mysterious workings of the SID will probably find parts of this document
just as beneficial as music-player routine developers or implementors of
software/hardware SID-emulation engines. In my opinion whatever you use in your
life, you can utilize it better if you know its internals, than treating it as
a mere black-box. It's up to you whether you feel genious enough to compose SID
music by instinct or you try to ever expand your knowledge.
 I found many resourceful materials about SID already on the internet when I
developed SID-Wizard, SwinSID-Ultimate and jsSID/cSID engines, but it can be
very tiresome to dig them all up from different places. There is an overall
technical document about the graphic chip of the C64 called VIC-article. To my
surprise there were still no such kind of texts for the SID. Some of my sources
were an interview with Yannes, the source-code comments of Dag Lem's ReSID and
the ReSID-FP engine, the Kevtris reverse-engineering site, a document about DC
levels by Levente Hársfalvi, and my very own findouts I'll explain later.
So hopefully I collected enough information for you in this article at one
place to get the big picture. :)

Revisions, residence and pinout of SID

 There are two major versions called by their partnumber: the original one is
called '6581' and the new refined SID is '8580'. The 6581 can be found in the
top-middle region of the old C64 mainboards and it requires 12V power-supply for
its analog circuitry beside the 5V digital supply. The 8580 is found slightly to
the right at the bottom of new C64 boards and it requires 9V and 5V power rails.
There are two external capacitors to support the filter circuits integrated into
SID. These capacitors are quite different in value for old and new models,
therefore the SID versions are not readily interchangeable without any modding.
6581 models also prefer an 1kOhm resistor towards ground on their output for the
simplified output-stage driver circuit.
At least their 28-legged DIP package form-factor is the same so they fit into
each others' sockets without any hassles.
 Both models are nearly equivalent in their digital portions, but the different
silicon process they are based on (6581:NMOS, 8580:HMOS-II) and the different
designs make apparent differences how their analog circuits sound like,
especially mixing, filter curves and combined waveforms. More on these later...
There are big differences even between 6581 revisions themselves. (A 6582 model
was also released but it's internals are of the 8580, only the label differs.)


How does C64 control SID? (Registers)

 The method to control the sound-parameters of SID is called Memory-mapped I/O.
This means the Commodore 64 sees the SID at address $D400..$D420 (hexadecimal)
and it can write the internal registers ('control-bytes') of the SID just like
any other portion of the memory. Whenever you write to these addresses you
essentially modify the flip-flops inside the SID, which in turn sets parameters
like pitch, envelope, filter, etc. in real-time. Simple, isn't it?
(More SID chips can be added to the C64 and in that case their base-addresses
 differ from $d400. There's no specification yet where they should reside.)
Most registers are write-only and you can't read them back, but there is also
a little feedback from SID towards the C64 in the form of read-only registers,
not to mention bit-fading which makes tricks like Hein's ROR D400,X possible.
Let's see the registers one-by-one for the 3 channels:

1: D400,D401 Pitch low- and high-byte. These bytes together control the pitch
2: D407,D408 of the oscillators. 16 bits give us quite enough resolution to make
3: D40E,D40F perfect pitches in the region of 15Hz to 3848Hz (PAL) with equal
             steps of cca 0.06Hz. Human ear and brain perceives pitches in a
             non-linear fashion, that is we hear less difference between the
             equal frequency steps in higher regions than in the lower. Every
             upper octave has twice as much of the frequency as its lower
             counterpart. So for scales of musical notes we need to have a
             frequency-table to map them into these SID frequency-values.
             In the most widely used equally tempered chromatic (western) scale
             successive notes have the frequency-ratio of 12th root of 2.

1: D402,D403 Pulsewidth (duty-cycle) of the square waveform. This is a really
2: D409,D40A important feature of SID because variations of the pulse (square)
3: D410,D411 wave has very different spectral characteristics. This is really
             useful for smooth transitions between timbres (called sweep)
             that makes a sound more lively than a monotonic beep. Solo
             instruments are created this way most of the time. Fast-sweeping
             of pulsewidth enriches the spectrum of the sound and adds a kind
             of chorus effect.
             Luckily the shape of some combined waveforms can also be altered
             by the duty-cycle setting, giving even more timbres to choose from.
             The upper byte has only the lower nybble (4 bits) wired in so there
             are 4096 possibilities of pulsewidth to choose from, between 0
             and 100% duty-cycle from the thinnest to the fattest sound. One of
             the strengths of SID is that it essentially operates at 1MHz
             'sampling' frequency and the thinnest sounds are clear. This is not
             always the case with emulated SID sounds of only 44kHz or so.

1:   D404    Waveform and envelope-control. This register have bits that control
2:   D40B    different things separately. The upper nybble controls which of the
3:   D412    4 available waveforms are turned on. They can also be turned on at
             the same time due to the properties of the underlying silicon
             technology. This results in the the so-called 'combined waveforms'
             which Bob Yannes is officially against of, which is understandable
             because these connect some outputs togenther. Never mind, these are
             used in many masterworks from the beginning. The new 8580 has more
             defined and louder combined waveforms. How this is done, deserves a
             separate topic in this article, stay tuned...
             Control-bits of the waveform: bit7($80): noise, bit6($40):pulse
                                         bit5($20): sawtooth, bit4($10):triangle
             If none of the waveforms are selected then the floating of the
             last wave-output value can be observed for a while, then it decays,
             on a real C64 the duration is temperature (uptime) dependent.
              The oscillator in the SID can anytime be reset and stopped by the
             bit3 (value:8) 'TEST'-bit turned on. It was probably implemented in
             SID for factory testing but it comes handy as a tool in chipmusic.
             Whether it generates a high or low steady output depends on the
             selected waveform. (Contrary to a misbelief, test-bit doesn't have
             any effect on the envelope-generator, but the oscillator only.)
              If you want really special, jawdropping tones, there are 2 more
             weapons to utilize, one is bit2 (value:4) 'RING'-modulation, the
             other is bit1 (value:2) channel-'SYNC'. Ring-modulation has effect
             only on the waveforms containing triangle but not sawtooth, and in
             a nutshell it mirrors/folds the wave's upper half when the neighbor
             channel's oscillator is in the 2nd half of its period. This creates
             richer spectrum and very interesting effects including formant-like
             sounds, all without filters. Channel-synchronization on the other
             hand resets the oscillator whenever a neighboring oscillator enters
             the 2nd half of its period. This also creates fascinating waves
             that resemble human voice (where formants are synced to vocalcords)
             The controlling channels in these scenarios are always the lower
             channels. For example, channel 2 is controlled by channel 1.
             Mostly these 2 functions are mastered by experimenting as it's hard
             to get a grasp how it really works and to estimate the results.
             As with the waveforms, ringmod and sync can be combined together.
              Last but not least there is the 'GATE'-bit which does more than
             one would think at first sight. It controls the volume-envelope of
             the generated waveform: starts and stops the notes, so to speak.

1: D405,D406 Attack/Decay and Sustain/Release ADSR envelope generator settings.
2: D40C,D40D When GATE-bit is turned on, the 'ADSR' envelope-generator starts an
3: D413,D414 'attack' phase, thus it starts the sound and if it's kept active,
             the volume rises at the rate of the corresponding ADSR setting
             until it reaches the maximum level. Then it falls to the 'sustain'
             level at the rate of 'decay' setting. Turning off gate-bit starts
             the 'release' phase, which means the note-volume falls towards zero
             at the rate of the 'release' setting. Though this is the basic
             operation of the GATE-bit, it can be turned on/off during any phase
             of the ADSR envelope. As a rule of thumb when it turns on it always
             starts an attack phase, and initiates release when it's turned off,
             though the envelope isn't reset to 0 if it's in the middle region.
              But unfortunately, with SID life is not so simple. As you will see
             later in the more thorough explanations, ADSR sometimes does not do
             what it's told to. You'll get weaker or even missed notes with
             certain ADSR values and GATE-triggering schemes. No, it's not a
             'humanize' function intentionally built into the SID. I think the
             reason is the resourcefullness that was a must for people making
             VLSI chip design in the beginning of 80s. Maybe some rush came on
             top of it too, so ADSR rate-counters are never reset in SID. It
             would be logical to reset them when a note gets triggered by the
             GATE-bit but that's not the case. What worsens it further is the
             fact that the counters can overlook their rate-settings. I'll
             explain it later, for now on it's enough to know that luckily
             people came up with a solution long ago: the 'Hard restart'. The
             optimal way to reset the ADSR before triggering notes is still
             a subject of discussions at CSDb forums. Different music players
             implement it in slightly different ways. There are also some less
             known wraparound issues in the envelope-generator that I'll
             explain in the upcoming parts of this document.
              Attack happens on a linear scale  Here's a list of Attack times
             on PAL C64:  2ms, 8ms, 16ms, 24ms, 38ms, 56ms, 68ms, 80ms,
                          100ms, 250ms, 500ms, 800ms, 1s, 3s, 5s, 8s
             Decay and Release has a longer (3 times Attack) non-linear curve.

  D415,D416  Filter cutoff-frequency control low- and high-byte. One of SID's
             strengths is its analog filter. The process of creating raw waves
             with rich spectral content and then filtering out some of the
             components is called substractive sound-synthesis, the SID way.
             The filter is common for all the channels but it can be applied to
             them separately on demand. Once the filter is set on a channel the
              cutoff-frequency can be controlled at 11bit resolution. (Low-byte
              has only the lower 3 bits implemented, the others have no effect.)
             On the 6581 the curve of the cutoff-control is nonlinear, with cca
             200Hz below a 'treshold' and often the basses sound more muffled
             compared to the 8580 which has nearly perfect linear control-curve.
             (But again our ears hear the same difference at low frequencies
              better than at the high ones so we perceive it as nonlinear too.)
             As a flipside the 6581 cutoff frequency can go up to the top of
             hearable range while 8580 can go down near 0Hz but tops at ~13kHz.
              6581 has an interesting distortion at low frequencies which I will
             explain later. 8580's new filter-design lacks this 'feature' and
             there's only distortion when high resonances boost the signal.

    D417     Filter-switch and resonance. The high-nybble here controls the
             resonance of the filter, the hump at the cutoff frequency. Filter
             sounds more prominent with this setting than a neutral curve with
             no emphasis. This behaves differently for the SID-models similarly
             to the cutoff-control: 6581 has no much change up to a point while
             8580 resonance-control is continuous, although it's non-linear.
              Setting high resonance can lead to distortions as the magnified
             signal's level approaches the limits presented by the 9V/12V power.
              The low nybble has 3 bits dedicated to turn filter on/off on the
             channels: bit2(value4):channel3, bit1(2):channel2, bit0(1):channel1
             The amount of filtered channels has a little effect on the cutoff
             and resonance, but it's not very much noticable.
              Bit3 (value:8) is the switch for the external audio input which
             can be fed to the SID and mixed into the output beside the internal
             channels. Some people use this bit to decrease noise coming into
             the SID from outside by filtering it out. Originally it might have
             been added so that SID could be used like a wah-effect pedal.

    D418     Main volume and filter-band. The low nybble of this register has
             control over the main volume of the SID. There is a little bit of
             leakage though, so even when you set it to 0 it passes through a
             little amount of sound. The more important fact about this nybble
             is however, that it causes a little shift in the output signal. The
             bigger the volume the more the offset is. This is very useful to
             play 'digis' since the 80s. This effect is much less noticable in
             the refined 8580 circuitry, so this is a classical problem with new
             C64 machines that digitalized speech is barely hearable. But this
             somewhat compensates for the harsh clicks of the 6581 that appear
             when the master volume or filter-parameters are changed.
              High nybble of this register has 3 bits that control what kind of
             filter to use:
             bit6(value $40): high-pass, bit5($20):band-pass, bit4($10):low-pass
             These modes can be combined together to form a notch-filter or a
             low-pass filter with brighter sound, whatever.
              Bit7 (value:$80) has a special function, it can prevent channel3
             from going to the mixer, though it's still passed to the filter, so
             this has no effect on a filtered 3rd channel. The idea was to use
             channel3 as a LFO (low-frequency oscillator) to control parameters
             without the need of the CPU to do that task. But in practice we
             don't want to lose a precious channel when the CPU can create any
             control-waveform easily. So let's leave this bit at zero, please.

  D419,D41A  POTX,POTY Paddle read values. SID took the responsibility for
             reading analog resistance values on the C64 inputs. Mostly for
             paddles to control games but mouse can be connected to these inputs
             or any potentiometer with around 500kOhm maximal resistance to
             utilize the full range of 0..255 values. Voltage can't be applied
             to these inputs to digitize sound, etc. It works by charging and
             discharging a capacitor through the connected resistance and it
             determines the resistance periodically by how much time it took
             to charge the capacitor. Unfortunately this measurement has a
             jittering even with steady input. Software-based filtering can help
             to smooth this out. (A 'moving average' filter proved to be fine.)

  D41B,D41C  OSC3 and ENV3. These are the 8bit readable registers that represent
             the waveform-selector and envelope-generator outputs of the 3rd
             channel. In combination with the channel3 disabling mentioned
             before these can be used as LFO in rare cases. But a more useful
             feature is to determine which model of SID is present in the
             machine by checking for waveform and envelope differences. I used
             these registers many times to display an oscilloscope for the
             3rd channel or control graphic effects by the music. Use your
             imagination what else it could be used for.



                      How does SID produce sound? (SID-internals)


Phase-accumulators (oscillators, pitch)

 First of all, let's start with the three oscillators. Without oscillation a
sound could never be heard through the air, you know. In the SID this is done
by the 'phase-accumulators'. A phase-accumulator is basically a 24bit counter
which can be incremented not only with a single step each clock but from 0 to
65535 steps. That 16bit value which we can add at each clock pulse directly
determines the frequency of the oscillation. How? The phase accumulator wraps
around when it reaches its maximal value, and starts over to count up again.
This represents a sawtooth-like waveform. We build upon this base in the
next stages of the sound-generation chain.
The master clock-frequency and so the SID clock is 985248Hz in the PAL C64.
If the frequency value is 0 in the frequency-registers we don't add to the
phase accumulator, the oscillation is stopped. Adding 1 gives the lowest
hearable frequency we can produce. With the 24bit phase-accumulator it takes
24th power of 2 clock pulses to fully count up, so at the C64 clock frequency
this happens 17 times. 17Hz is the lowest. Adding 65535, the maximal value
needs 256 clock steps to reach the top, so the highest pitch can be 3849 Hz.

Beside pitch-setting we have some more control over the phase-accumulators,
they can be zeroed (reset) by:
-Setting TEST-bit (mentioned above) to 1 on the corresponding channel
-When SYNC-bit is 1 on a channel, the phase-accumulator on that channel is
 zeroed at the moment the other (source) channel's MSB (bit23) rises to 1.
 (Again, Sync source-to-destination channel-pairs are:  1->2 , 2->3 , 3->1 )


Waveform-generators (unfiltered waveforms/timbres)

As mentioned before we have 4 basic waveforms to choose from on each cannel.
They are created in different ways in 12-bit resolution.
 Sawtooth is the simplest one, it's simply the upper 12 bits of the
phase-accumulator.
 Pulse/square-waveform is derived by comparing the pulsewidth/duty-cycle
registers (value 0..4095) to the current top 12 bits of the phase-accumulator,
and connecting all output-bits to 1 (Vcc) when it's greater, and to 0 (GND)
when it's smaller.
 Triangle waveform is made from the phase-accumulator (sawtooth) by XOR-ing
all of its 11 upper bits with its MSB (bit23). This causes the folding back
of the 2nd half of the sawtooth-wave giving the triangle waveform. But as this
has a halved amplitude, the 12-bit wave-output must be generated from the
left-shifted form of this, so the output has the same amplitude as sawtooth's.
 The ring-modulation for triangle is achieved by enhancing the above-mentioned
MSB XOR-ing with an extra XOR if the RING-bit is set. This extra XOR with the
MSB happens whenever the source (modulation) channel's phase-accumulator-MSB
is 1. In other words, the triangle is inverted/flipped by the other channel
(again, Ring source-to-destination channel-pairs are: 1->2 , 2->3 , 3->1 )
 Noise waveform has its own 'counter' in the form of a pseudo-random sequence
generator. It's realized by a 23-bit LFSR (Linear Feedback Shift-register),
which is a shift-register that when clocked, simply shifts its 0/1 contents to
the 'left'. What makes it an LFSR is the feedback mechanism that generates the
signal to be fed back to its rightmost bit (LSB). There are so-called 'taps'
on carefully selected places, bit 22 and 17 of the LFSR, that are XOR-ed and
that value is fed back to the LSB. This generates a very long sequence of
pseudo-random values before it repeats. The LFSR is clocked by the rising edge
of bit20 of phase-accumulator so the noise spectrum, sense of pitch can be
controlled. With TEST-bit enabled the feedback can be forced to 1 in the LFSR
so it can be filled with 1s over a cca 8000 cycles' period, reaching the value
of $7FFFFF which is probably the initial value of it at startup.
 The 23bit LFSR value still has some linearity/predictability between the
adjacent bits so we take the noise-output from a so-called 'scrambler' instead.
In case of SID the scrambling is simply done by using 8 different bits of the
LFSR to constitute to the wave-output (bit 20,18,14,11,9,5,2,0) which is only
8 bit in resolution, enough for a noise. The 4 low-bits are not used for noise.

Waveform-routing:

Now we have the 4 basic waveforms (still digital, 12-bit wide) generated and
ready for routing. Inside the SID there are pass-transistors (FETs) on all 12
bits of the waveform-outputs acting as series-switches to select which of the
4 waveform-ouptputs we want to route to a channel's output bit-drivers.
 Ideally only one of them is turned on at a time but there's no multiplexing
logic to ensure that. This brings us further possibilities. Bob Yannes himself
discouraged the usage of combining the waveforms by turning more outputs on,
probably because connecting active output-drivers together is never a good idea
in electronics, they will fight against each other if one wants to drive a low
signal while the other wants to drive a high signal. However, in chips made by
NMOS and HMOS chip-fabrication technologies the driving strengths of outputs
are less for high logic signals than for low, due to the 'upper' MOSFETs used
as 'active'/'dynamic' resistors. (CMOS can drive both logic values equally as
strong, that would be more prone to high currents and failures if SID was ever
to be recreated with this up-to-date technology.)
 In practice there are no reports that SIDs went wrong due to the usage of
combined waveforms but who can tell? They can become hot enough by the standard
usage already...

Combined waveforms (more thorough explanation):

During the development of jsSID I made researches how the complex combined
waveforms are generated. (I could generate them by functions, see jsSID
source code for more details and ASCII schematics.)
 If you look at them closely you probably notice that they look like fractals,
small portions of them resembling their overall shape. It's logical to deduce
from this that there is some recursive bit-wise reason for that.
 Checking on the great reverse-engineering results of decapped SIDs at Kevtris
page revealed the circuit of the above-mentioned waveform-selector logic. There
are simple amplifiers for all of the selected (routed) waveform-bits before the
DAC (Digital-to-Analog) stage. The waveform-combining happens BEFORE these
bit-amplifiers and DAC, so the combining is not made on the analog outputs, but
bit-by-bit in the previous digital stage.
 To understand how the combined waveforms are generated, the analog behaviours
of this digital circuit-region needs to be discussed. The 3 crucial analog
contributors are the above mentioned weak driving of high-bits, the resistance
of chip-fabric and the treshold-level of the amplifiers before the DACs:
 For example, take the simplest case: when you connect sawtooth and pulse
waveforms together, you connect all their bits together through a weaker
connection, because that is what square waveform does, as explained above,
it connects all 12 bits to GND or power-rail.
If the square/pulse output is 0, driving it to GND is so strong that no matter
if the sawtooth-bit wants to drive 1, it will be below the treshold of the
bit-amplifier so the DAC gets 0 to output. But when the pulse-output is 1 the
bits are driven by it to high only 'weakly'. In that case a 0 sawtooth-bit can
bring the combined bit-value low enough to ensure 0 at the output of the bit-
amplifier and the DAC. This sounds like an AND operation between the pulse and
sawtooth waveform-bits, and we would get a sawtooth if pulsewidth is 100%.
But it's not that simple: as the pulse-waveform connects all bits together
through a given resistance (depending on the chip-technology) it's possible for
neighboring bits of the sawtooth to affect each other. The closer a bit to the
other bit is, the more it pulls it down towards 0 or up towards 1, vice-versa,
eventually agreeing on a level that is above or below the bit-output's treshold.
This is the recursive process responsible for the fractal-like look.
(In code I made it by two nested for loops where each bit has a value affected
by all the others. With proper parameters the waveforms were very close to the
original.)
 It's worth noting that if you look at a pulse+sawtooth with 100% duty-cycle,
the combined waveform samples don't go above the corresponding sawtooth values,
only below. This means that the FETs driving high are really much weaker than
the ones driving low. Especially on 6581 old SID where most combined waveforms
are weak (contain many 0s) and have MSB suppressed (as a result their amplitudes
are halved but frequencies doubled except with pulse+triangle combination).
 If you add triangle to the 'mix' it gets even more complex, it connects adjacent
bits (for the left-shifting mentioned at waveform-generators) and provides even
more connections to 0 level, so combined waveforms containing triangle have more
low or zero values as seen looking at them.
 Noise can be combined with other waveforms but the discussed zeroing effect is
able to clear the bits in the LFSR gradually and when the LFSR is filled with 0s
it 'locks up' and can only be restarted by test-bits. (Interestingly in VICE
emulator I could set a pulsewidth very close to 100% and combine that pulse with
a noise ($C1 waveform) without locking it up. Never tried this on real SID btw.)


Envelope-generator (ADSR aka channel-volume)

 ADSR envelope-generator affects the analog part of SID around DAC. Each channel
has one, and its output is a 8bit value (0..255) controlling the VCA (Voltage-
controlled amplifier) that determines the volume of the corresponding channel.
 Based on the ADSR parameters given in register and the GATE bit in the waveform
control register, three internal counters (per channel) are operated:

-The 8bit 'Envelope-counter' which is fed to the DAC controlling the channel-VCA

-The 15bit 'Rate-counter' is a prescaler to set the steepness (speed) of the
 envelope-counter in Attack/Decay/Release phases, these are the prescale values
 (periods) for Attack/Decay/Release values of 0..F:
 0:9, 1:32, 2:63, 3:95, 4:149, 5:220, 6:267, 7:313, 8:392, 9:977, A:1954,
 B:3126, C:3907, D:11720, E:19532, F:31251
 (Note that a value of 0 still has a period, and therefore there's nothing like
  zero-time Attack/Decay. That's why sounds with AD=00 have clicky starts.)

-The 'Exponent-counter' is a further prescaler for the envelope-counter in Decay
 and Release phases to ensure more ear-friendly nonlinear sound-decays. There's
 a space-efficient exponential-table in SID with prescale-values paired to
 envelope-counter value-ranges/stages:
 255..95:1x, 93..55:2x, 54..27:4x, 26..15:8x, 14..7:16x, 6..1:30x, 0:1x
 (At the start a fast 1x prescaling/division, it gradually grows to a 30x slow
  decay when envelope-counter falls below 6.)

Several state-bits determine the current ADSR state/phase:
 Attack-phase, Decay+Sustain phase, Hold-at-zero state
A transition of GATE-bit to 1 turns on Attack-phase and prepares for the next
Decay+Sustain-phase, disables any Hold-at-zero state.
 Attack-phase lasts until the envelope-counter counts up to $FF then it's turned
off and Decay+Sustain-phase dominates in which the envelope-counter through the
exponent-counter prescaling counts down until it reaches the sustain-value.
(Which is expanded to 0..$FF by doubling the 0..F sustain-value to the high-nybble).
 A transition of GATE-bit to 0 turns off any Attack or Decay+Sustain-phase and
counts down through the exp-prescaler until it reaches 0 (Release-phase) and
enters 'Hold-at-zero' state and only leaves this state when GATE goes to 1.

ADSR delay-bug:

For hardware-efficiency in SID most counters are made from LFSRs that need less
parts and it doesn't matter if they don't count linearly, the comparison values
are simply selected according to their predetermined (pseudo-random) sequence.
 But that turned out to be a problem with rate-counters that determine the
speed of the envelope-counter. The rate-counters are only reset when they count
up to their current comparison value which is based on prescale-table looked
up by the 0..F Attack/Decay/Release value, depending on the current ADSR phase.
 As there's a single rate-counter for all the 3 timed ADSR-phases and starting
a new phase doesn't reset it, it's possible for the rate-counter to miss
prescale-value (rate-period) that it already went through: when for example a
faster (lower-period) Attack follows a slower (greater-period) Release. In that
case the match is not found until the rate-counter goes up through its full
sequence and starts over by wrapping around. That can take as long as 32.8ms
(counting at 1MHz, cycletime is 1us, 32768*1us=32.8ms). The next note can delay
that long, and it's quite audible. This is the so-called ADSR delay-bug.
 The ADSR delay-bug appears statistically rarely when the difference between
the rate-periods of adjacent phases is small (doesn't decrease much), but is
more frequent when the next rate-period is much smaller than the previous.
(It's less known/noticed but is logical: this delay-bug can happen after a
 transition from an Sustain to a Release phase too.)

 We'll see later how to overcome (or how to enforce) this delay-bug situation.
But for now these are all the important details how the ADSR basically works.


Filter (shaped timbre, substractive synthesis)

 After the channel-DACs there are 2 routes for the now analog waveforms to take,
the direct lines to the main output mixer or through the filter-circuitry.
In the register-section I described the exact addresses and bits of the filter-
controls which determine this route. The channels going into the filter are
summed thourgh resistors.
 This circuit in the SID is a '2-integrator loop bi-quadratic' filter and as its
name suggests, it contains two integrators in a loop through a 3rd member, a
simple amplifier for resonance/emphasis. The integrators are basically inverting
operational amplifiers with capacitive feedback, these capacitors are both
outside the SID-chip on the motherboard and are of fixed values. What makes it
possible to change the filter cutoff-frequency is the VCR (Voltage-controlled
Resistance) in series to the inputs of these integrators, serving as the
variable resistors (both controlled in tandem) in the RC filter/integrator.

 The 8580 and the old 6581 SIDs differ very much in their solution of the VCR:
The 6581 uses 2 single FETs as VCRs with some attempts for linearity by having
negative feedback resistances to their gates and operating in their near-zero
signal-region. There are resistor-ladder DACs having the filter-frequency set
in the registers converted to an analog signal, that controls the gates of the
VCR MOSFETs. But this simple control of a series (common-source) FET has its
disadvantage of feedback from the signal-path: The FET is a transconductance
device that transforms voltage between its Gate and Source terminals. But the
source is not at GND so the Gate-Source voltage depends not only on the cutoff
control signal but slightly on the integrator's small input-signal too. That
causes a kind of distortion unique to the 6581 old SID, because thanks to the
'resistance-modulation' of the VCR the cutoff-control signal gets a bit of the
audio-signal, so the audio signal essentially alters its own filter-cutoff
frequency even during a single wave, the waveform becomes less rounded. This
unique fat sound is liked very much by many people.
 The control-curve of the 6581 SID is also nonlinear because there are about
1.5GOhm 'shunt' resistors between the Drain and Source terminals of the VCR-FETs
so when their resistances go above this value, less and less change is seen
in the cutoff-frequency. On average this 1.5GOhm resistance ensures about 200Hz
minimum of cutoff-frequency. There is big spread among 6581 SIDs so these
resistance-values and the cutoff-frequencies vary wildly from chip-to-chip.
(There are the so-called 'dark' and 'light' SIDs cutoff-curves...)

 The 8580 SID's redesign affected its filter very much: As seen in the die
photos at kevtris.org, the single-FET VCRs were replaced by a different method,
essentially the filter-cutoff control-voltage DACs seem to be integrated with
the VCRs into a digitally controllabre resistor-ladder VCR. Anyhow, this results
in a very precise (I'd say laboratory quality) and linear filter-cutoff control,
and filter-distortion seems to be gone too.
(Back in time Robert Moog could only make sophisticated analog VCFs from bipolar
 transistors connected as differential amplifiers in a ladder layout having
 capacitors in the rungs, the 'Moog-filter'. MOSFETs in SID made it easier.)


Mixing and Output (main volume)

 The output stage is simply mixing the non-filtered audio route and the filter's
output and applies the main volume on them thourgh a VCA, then the SID-sound
ready for amplification goes to the outside world in ways described earlier.
(Some people say the simple transistor-based output-amplifier in the C64 might
 add some characteristic nonlinearity to the SID-sound... maybe.)


           Usage of SID in practice, tips, tricks and secrets
           --------------------------------------------------

Knowing the internals of SID is not enough for squeezing good music out of it.
We still need an interface from the SID to the Human, namely: the composer.

The composer needs a tool to compose and execute his/her ideas. There are many
trackers around and most of them add a lot of extras by software to the SID to
bring it closer to ready-made synthesizers: frequency-tables,vibratos,LFOs,etc.


Hard-Restart (delay-bug prevention)

One of the most important features of tools is to eliminate the ADSR delay-bug
so the composer can rely on sound-starts. The workaround to the bug is called
'Hard-Restart'. (I've have another writing about it in FlexSID user-manual.)
 The method 'resets' the ADSR rate-counters so when a new sound (Attack) happens
we know the rate-counter is not anywhere, but it's counting inside the first
9 steps rapidly. To achieve this we simply need to set both AD and SR registers
to 00 and GATE to 0 at least 2 PAL-frames (40ms) before a new sound is about to
start. This also ensures that the Release-phase arrives at 0 level.
 At least this is the method that always works, no matter what ADSR settings
the previous and the next instruments have. Different programs use different
approaches, many times only SR is zeroed, which is OK too. In programs where
the Hard-Restart-ADSR can be set to any value, people tend to use inbetween
values in the pursuit of softer sound-starts, but to me most methods seem
casually suitable for a given piece.

 There's a 'new kind of hard-restart' mentioned at CodeBase64 (by Shrydar, and
Lft is involved here too), they call it 'Bottle', and it's a totally different
cycle-exact code approach. It is able to reset the rate-counter in the timeframe
of about 10 rasterlines (less than 1ms) instead of a 20ms frame, by utilizing
the delaybug-free safe transition from a slow attack to a fast decay. There's an
other ADSR-bug in SID too: envelope-counter too can wrap around when it is at
value $FF and an Attack is triggered. This is used to bring the envelope back
to $00 fast in this 'Bottle' approach.
Only time will tell how soon this restart-method gets implemented in players...

To delaybug or not to delaybug? (sexy-start)

 What differs in most editors and their players/drivers is how the new sound
starts after the Hard-Restart. Different recipes work differently. To avoid a
new delay-bug after Hard-Ristart IMO the best write-order is to set AD first
before turning on GATE so it won't affect the rate-counter (thanks to being in
release-phase after Hard-Restart), then set the GATE-bit to 1 to change to
Attack phase, and then immediately set the SR-register which will only have any
effect when the next GATE-bit turnoff happens (note ends).
 But most player-routines does quite the opposite instead (cause the delay-bug)
to achieve the so-called 'sexy-start' of sounds: They write AD and SR before
turning GATE-bit on and if the Release-value is big enough (above 3..4), a new
sound with a small Attack value of 0..1 is started, the rate-counter had a
chance to advance meanwhile and cause a miss of the Attack compare-value. The
more one waits between AD+SR and GATE writing the more probable this situation
becomes. The result is having a delay in the start of sound of about 32.8ms,
so the 1st frame of the sound is silent (usually waveform $09 is set here to
set TEST-bit), but the 2nd frame's last 7..8 milliseconds are audible. And that
is what musicians need, a very short waveform (the first row of a waveform-
sequencer table in the instrument-editor) to make the start of sound
percussive without turning to multi-speed tunes. Usually high-pitched
white-noise is placed here. Our ears are much more sensitive to changes and a
sound-start fulfills that scenario.
 It's not important to use Hard-Restart for fairly stable 'sexy-start' notes
but the release of previous note should be much bigger than the attack of the
new note, and it's advised to decay to 0 level before the new note starts. It's
easier with drums that are decayed fast from within the waveform-tables. Many
composers in the past didn't use Hard-Restart at all but knew these rules and
selected ADSR values of adjacent sounds carefully.
 To allow more diverse instruments but still have much bigger release before
attack we can set the SR register to $0F artificially 1 frame before the
sound-start. This is a simpler kind of 'hard-restart' and this doesn't zero
the rate-counter but the opposite: it lets enough time (20ms) for it to count
into a region which will almost surely be above the compare-value of the next
Attack and cause a delay-bug, and thanks to that, a shortened 1st frame
of the next sound aka 'sexy-start'.

Digital samples on the SID

Digis were not the strongest side of SID in the past. The volume-register
setting trick causing an offset is described in the section about SID-registers
but it could only produce 4bit-quality sound and that affected the main volume
of SID so if normal SID-music was played beside it sounded distorted/modulated.
(Not to mention the big difference between the digi-volume on SIDs.
 In my emulations I could separate the AC-component of the main volume and send
 it to a separate digi-channel, and the DC-component still used as main volume
 was even freed from audible pops when volume was changed slowly for fade-in.)
The next 'easiest' method to play digital samples on C64 is Mahoney's method:
He measured the offsets caused by all the bits (lowpass/highpass/volume/etc.)
in the SID with different settings of 100% duty-cycle pulses and ordered them
in a 256-byte table for 8580 and 6581 SIDs. There are about 30..50 different
quantization-levels can be reached with the proper settings and tables which
is better than the 16 levels of simple digis. The downside is that no normal
SID-channels can be used beside the digi, but it's still as simple as writing
$d418 at a given sampling frequency.
 The other methods that can achieve 8-bit digi-resolution on SID needs precisely
timed (cycle-exact) code. Some methods (e.g. Wonderland demo-series) used the
pulsewidth-control in SID to create up to about 15kHz PWM signal by resetting
the phase-accumulator at this rate. Because of the audible carrier frequency
this was not so appealing for music (maybe a lowpass-filter is a solution for
the carrier noise) but a forward-step nevertheless.
 The ultimate solution at the moment is SounDemon's digi-routine which utilizes
the floating signal on a channel when no waveform is selected (waveform $01).
The task of this method is similar to the PWM-method, to periodically reset the
phase-accumulator at the given samplerate with the TEST-bit, and set the
oscillator-frequency proportionally to the desired sample level. The ADSR must
be kept at sustain-level, so the waveform is kept at value $01 most of the
time. Then after a given amount of time (that should fit in the sample-period)
the waveform is set to $11 (triangle) for a short moment to update the floating
value at the waveform-selector output. The next round comes so fast that the
floating value doesn't decay significantly. This is like a sample-and-hold
circuitry. The upward-slope of the triangle waveform instead of a sawtooth
ensures higher range (resolution) in less time.
 The SounDemon digi's only disadvantage is the strict timing and CPU resource
in needs but it sounds good, the other SID-channels can be used beside the
digi just fine.



Sound-design & composing tips
-----------------------------

Here I collect some of my findouts about the good SID sounds. In the past
I coded a tool called 'SIDhack' to separate SID-channels and debug in realtime
what different SID tunes do to sound so good. That tool came handy and I made
some tunes containing ripoffs from other SIDs as case studies, like the tune
'sidhack' in the SID-Wizard package. CSDb forum can be a good source too for
sound-design tips & tricks, experiences of people shared between each other.

In general our brain, our neurons are sensitive to changes instead of steady
signals. This might be evolutional solution to long-term stimuli and to focus
on better on new events. We have 'differentators' built-in. For example the
sense of smells and colours and even touch degrades over a short time: we get
used to smells, we see the opposite of a color when it's removed, placing our
hand on a raw surface feels it but the feeling fades. Our eyes make
micro-movements just to keep the nerve-signals frequently updated, stopping them
by will leads to slowly losing the view.

The ears work similarly and our whole appreciation of music too: We like the
changing sounds better than the steady ones, therefore a pulsewidth-modulation
instead of a fixed duty cycle can make a big difference in a solo instrument.
This is the same for the filter, a filtersweep on a bass sound or keyboard-track
(opening with pitch-increase) is more desirable than a muffled steady cutoff
frequency.
So one ingredient of good SID-sound is pulse/filter-sweep. Even better if the
program supports turning off the filter/pulsewidth-program reset when the new
sound starts, that gives even more variations.
Speaking about variations, rhythic variations, syncope and of course melodic
variations, and even variations at higher level (in the structure, arrangement)
are desired in music, but that's a whole other topic on it's own right, I'll
stay with the sound-design for now.

Sawtooth and triangle waveforms are invariable compared to pulse but sometimes
they give the character of an instrument much better. I especially like when
arpeggios are made with triangle, gives a feeling of ambient.
But I guess pulse/square is the most used because its spectral content can
vary much. The thin pulses are similar to sawtooth waves, the 50% pulses are
glassy and Nintendo-like, but for a bit more harmonic contents I usually like
to set a pulsewidth somewhere near 50% instead. Slow pulse-sweep is the key
for the most beautiful solo-sounds, but very fast pulse-sweep is the key for
some 'corus' effect. (Probably the reason for the 'chorus'/'room' effect is
twofold: the change of harmonic content might cause a bit of percieved detuning
 and my other assumption is that when a pulsewidth is changed it doesn't happen
in sync with the phase-accumulator and there are many partial pulses as a
result causing different frequencies temporarily.)

And last but not least the pitches: Our ears are very sophisticated to minimal
changes in sound but to me it seems we're the most sensitive to pitch in music.
A very minimal detuning can cause inconvenience in melodies. But detuning can
be our friend too to create good instruments. Sure, detuning a channel compared
to an other can achieve choir effect like with the accordion, doing it with
vibrato can make the music even more lively. Vibratos are ment to be used with
a little bit of delay even on live instruments because our ear needs a stable
note-start before letting the rest of it to vibrate. Vibratos are good tools
to emphasize notes just like dynamics.
Some chorus effect comes very handy for basses too to appear stronger under
the lowpass-filter.

For highpass-filters I usually don't prefer to use big resonances but they're
nearly essential on SID where the resonance is not too strong compared to
analog syths and VSTs. To make the bass-sound somewhat richer I usually set
both low-pass and bandbass filters. For special sounds like claps or speech,
the bandbass filter alone seems very good and should be used more frequently
in SID-tunes.

Sometimes it's good to enhance a solo instrument by dedicating the sole filter
to it. Basses in a mix can stay unfiltered and still sound good because they
have the deepness but their harmonic contents still keep the richness of the
music. Sometimes with jazzy and silent tunes the triangle waveform is good as
doublebass-like sound or even in techno tunes, and the filter can be used to
make the solos modern, sound more like an expensive synth.

Sync/ringmod?
 The have always been mysterious despite knowing how they work. Most of the
time some good sounds could be made by tweaking. In general, sync-effect seems
to be more deterministic, but ringmod gives frequencies that are hard to follow.
Using both is even more interesting and uncontrollable but playing around can
lead to good results...

Echo-simulations on a single channel in a melody are quite possible by
inserting silent notes between the normal notes. I don't know the others but
I usually feel the notes that best fit there and they're not necessarily some
notes appearing earlier on that channel or notes in the melody.

Good bassdrums can be made without filter in the waveform-table, sometimes
even with triangles. But the stronges bassdrums contain ~50% square waves in
a sudden frequency-drop at the first 1..2 frames, then only several notes
of drops in the last frames.

Good snare-sound can be made by only 1 but maximum 2 frames of ~50% square,
then the decaying white-noise sould continue asap. I like snares in funky
music which end abruptly but it's not obvious how to make them on SID. Usually
release values of 5..7 are fine for snare. I like the snares of Shogoon which
are made on 2 channels and you can really hear the oomph and the snarenoise
at the same time. But that's not always possible.

Arpeggios are tricky beasts. They can sound ugly when the pitch changes every
frame, I usually let pitches last at least 2..3 frames. To reduce the abrupt
pitch-changes even further, arpeggios can return to the base note. Having
chord-invertions can help further in making arpeggios more listenable.
If done well, complex harmonies with dissonant intervals sometimes are more
listenable as arpeggios than being played together. After all an arpeggio is
a fast melody so dissonances disappear fast, maybe that's why.

Dynamics in music are usually desired, there's more variety in a hihat or kick
or snare when there are strong and weak hits in good places. But interestingly
for some oldschool C64 tunes the fast repetitions without any dynamics sound
better, maybe they emphasize that this is a different style of music and not
something played by a human who automatically adds dynamics by the law of
physics.

All in all, good ears and being open-minded for new possibilities are probably
the best leads for creating interesting SID-music. And the importance of
composing should never be underestimated, a good composition with simple
instruments is often more joy to listen than a music with good sounds but
out of ideas and story.

                                            Hermit (Mihaly Horvath) Year 2022
